Fundamentals - deno.json and package.json (#788)
denoland/docs: runtime/fundamentals/configuration.md

if it's in your current working directory or parent directories. The `--config`
flag can be used to specify a different configuration file.

> ## `package.json` support

Reviewer: no backticks in titles please. they don't render or read well.

> ## `package.json` support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## package.json support
```

Deno also supports a `package.json` file for compatibility with Node.js
projects. If you have a Node.js project, it is not necessary to create a
`deno.json` file. Deno will use the `package.json` file to configure the
project.

If both a `deno.json` and `package.json` file are present in the same directory,
Deno will understand dependencies specified in both `deno.json` and
`package.json`; and use the `deno.json` file for Deno-specific configurations.
Read more about
[Node compatibility in Deno](/runtime/manual/node/compatibility).

## Dependencies

The `"imports"` field in your `deno.json` allows you to specify dependencies
used in your project. You can use it to map bare specifiers to URLs or file
paths making it easier to manage dependencies and module resolution in your
applications.

For example, if you want to use the `assert` module from the standard library in
your project, you could use this import map:

```json title="deno.json"
{
  "imports": {
    "std/assert": "jsr:@std/assert@^1.0.0",
    "chalk": "npm:chalk@5"
  }
}
```

Then your script can use the bare specifier `std/assert`:

```js title="script.ts"

> import { assertEquals } from "std/assert";

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should change this to `@std` instead of `std`

import chalk from "chalk";

assertEquals(1, 2);
console.log(chalk.yellow("Hello world"));
```

> You can also use `"dependencies"` field in `package.json`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also use a `"dependencies"` field in `package.json`:
```

Read more about
[formatting your code with Deno](/runtime/fundamentals/linting_and_formatting/).

## Lockfile

The `lock` field in the `deno.json` file is used to specify configuration of the
lock file that Deno uses to
[ensure the integrity of your dependencies](/runtime/fundamentals/modules/#integrity-checking-and-lock-files).
A lock file records the exact versions and integrity hashes of the modules your
project depends on, ensuring that the same versions are used every time the
project is run, even if the dependencies are updated or changed remotely.

```json title="deno.json"
{
  "lock": {
    "path": "./deno.lock",
    "frozen": true
  }
}
```

This configuration will:

- specify lockfile location at `./deno.lock` (this is the default and can be
  omitted)
- tell Deno that you want to error out if any dependency changes

Deno uses lockfile by default, you can disable it with following configuration:

```json title="deno.json"
{
  "lock": false
}
```

## Node modules directory

> By default Deno uses a `node_modules` directory based on the presence of
> `package.json` file in your project directory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default Deno uses a local `node_modules` directory if you have a
`package.json` file in your project directory.
```

You can control this behavior using the `nodeModulesDir` field in the
`deno.json` file.

```json title="deno.json"
{
  "nodeModulesDir": "auto"
}
```

You can set this field to following values:

| Value      | Behavior                                                                                                                           |
| ---------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `"none"`   | Don't use a local `node_modules` directory. Instead use global cache in `$DENO_DIR` that is automatically kept up to date by Deno. |
| `"auto"`   | Use a local `node_modules` directory. The directory is automatically create and kept up to date by Deno.                           |
| `"manual"` | Use a local `node_modules` direcory. User must keep this directory up to date manually, eg. using `deno install` or `npm install`. |

It is not required to specify this setting, the following defaults are applied:

- `"none"` if there is no `package.json` file in your project directory
- `"manual"` is there is a `package.json` file in your project directory

> ---

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

When using workspaces, this setting can only be used in the workspace root.
Specifying it in any of the members will result in warnings. The `"manual"`

> setting will only be applied if there's a `package.json` file in the workspace

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
setting will only be applied automatically if there's a `package.json` file in the workspace
```
